JUDY WOODRUFF: But first:
a unique look at the
victims of war in Syria.
In 2015, Canada began
that country's largest
refugee resettlement
program since the Vietnam
War.
Over the last year-and-a-half,
45,000 Syrian refugees have
made Canada their home, more
than double those
admitted in the U.S.
Now a group of comic book
artists are documenting refugee
stories through their art.
Special correspondent Stefan
Labbe and producer Lauren
Kaljur have the story.
STEFAN LABBE: In 2011,
Mohammed Alsaleh joined
the wave of anti-government
protesters sweeping
across Syria.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH, Syrian
Immigrant: It was the first
time in my life where I hear my
voice saying the word
freedom in public.
It was the first time in Syrian
history where a picture of
our dictator is being torn in
public.
And I was taking that shot.
That was one of the most
amazing days of my life.
STEFAN LABBE: That footage
would prove his undoing, as
the government began to crack
down on protesters.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: Now
they are attacking us.
STEFAN LABBE: Now a refugee in
Canada, Mohammed finally has
the chance to tell his story,
with the help of a nonprofit
graphic arts collective.
JONATHON DALTON, Comic
Book Artist: Cloudscape
finds people who have
come to Canada as refugees
and matches them with
comic book artists.
STEFAN LABBE: Jonathon Dalton
is an established comic artist.
He usually draws stories about
fantasy and historical fiction.
But this time, Mohammed's
life is on the page, a story
that begins with revolution.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: I was studying
medicine at Homs University
during the Arab Spring.
The first time I was
arrested was for filming
pro-democracy protests.
So, protesters would have
a flag with three stars.
JONATHON DALTON:
Three stars, OK.
I wasn't paying close
enough attention.
STEFAN LABBE: With funding from
the government, the comic book
artists will work closely with
refugees to create a
massive one-page comic.
JONATHON DALTON: This is
your story, so I want you to
have as much control over how
it's told as possible.
STEFAN LABBE: When they're
finished, the refugees'
story will be displayed
in bus shelters all
over Vancouver, Canada.
JONATHON DALTON: By drawing
people as cartoons, I
think you can engage the
reader to see themselves
in the story.
STEFAN LABBE: But it's about
more than putting yourself
in a refugee's shoes.
For Mohammed, comics have the
power to animate a humanitarian
crisis many have grown numb
to.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When you
try your best to share a story
about the worst crisis after
World War II, sometimes, you
feel that language is not
actually capable of doing that.
JONATHON DALTON: I think
that's what I drew.
STEFAN LABBE: After shooting the
protest footage, Mohammed had
no idea his future would take
a dark turn.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: I
tried my best to say
out of trouble, but...
STEFAN LABBE: Assad's security
forces stormed Mohammed's
classroom as he was writing an
exam.
He was charged with terrorism
for documenting the uprising.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: Those pictures
that I was able to upload
were all over the news, all
over the world.
STEFAN LABBE: Mohammed
was blindfolded and
shuttled off to one of the
regime's many detention
centers.
Over the next 150 days, the
guards would deprive him of food
and sleep, chain him from the
ceiling and beat him
inside of a tire.
And when he wasn't being
tortured, he was crammed into
small rooms with dozens of other
prisoners.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH:
I survived, yes.
They managed to change me.
They managed to terrorize me.
STEFAN LABBE: Mohammed was
released from prison when
his brother bribed a judge.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When I got
my freedom back, all I wanted
to do was see my family.
I also wanted to say goodbye.
I needed to get as
far away as I could.
STEFAN LABBE: He jumped into
a taxi and fled to Lebanon.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When you're
on survival mode, like where
you're not whole, it was
because of that, that I
decided to leave Syria.
It was because of that I decided
that I'm not going to risk
being detained and tortured
again.
STEFAN LABBE: He would soon be
chosen as one of the first 200
Syrian refugees to be granted
asylum in Canada.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: When I
arrived in Vancouver, I had
only the clothes on my back.
STEFAN LABBE: Three
years on, he's built a
life for himself here.
Now Mohammed helps other
refugees newly arrived
in the city, people like
Osama, who just arrived
from Syria with his
wife and four kids.
Today, Mohammed is
helping them start over.
He signs them up for health
insurance, helps them open a
bank account, and teaches them
how to withdraw
money from an ATM.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: Withdraw.
STEFAN LABBE: But with
the cartoon project, he
wants to reach beyond
the refugee community.
MOHAMMED ALSALEH: I think it's
very important to, you know,
share my story, other immigrants
to share their stories as well,
in order to demonstrate we have
this beautiful place because
we welcome others, because
we are the positive example
in a -- in a very bad world.
STEFAN LABBE: With his
family scattered across
Turkey and Germany, and
anti-immigrant movements
on the size, Mohammed is
focused on one thing, reuniting
his family here in Canada.
For "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Stefan Labbe in Vancouver.